VBeeb 1.6 Manual
----------------

1. Introduction

VBeeb emulates a basic BBC Microcomputer system.  This includes dual Disc double sided drives, Cassette interface and ROMs.

VBeeb is made to closely mimic the working of a real BBC Micro at a bit level, this means that software and games produced
for the original BBC Micro should run faithfully on the emuulator.


2. The Keyboard

The layout of the BBC Micro keyboard differs in a number of ways from modern computer keyboards.  
The majority of keys such as the letter and number keys appear in the same place as a modern keyboard.  The following
differences apply - the modern keyboard layout is given first followed by the BBC Micro layout:

F1 to F10 are F0 to F9
F12 is Break
Backslash '\' is Shift Lock
Right Control is Copy
Open Square Bracket '[' is @
Close Square Bracket ']' is [
Hash '#' is ]
Insert is \
Delete is _
Single Quote ' is :
Home or Left Arrow is Cursor Left
End or Up Arrow is Cursor Up
Page Up or Right Arrow is Cursor Right
Page Down or Down Arrow is Cursor Down

Other keys as seen on a BBC Micro are as on a modern keyboard.

The status of the Caps Lock, Shift Lock and Cassette Motor LEDs are shown as text on the status bar of VBeeb.


3. The File Menu

VBeeb can load and save the following types of files:

Disc images: both single sided (img and ssd) and double sided (dsd),
Cassette Images: UEF files.
Archive Format: groups of files with acompanying data (inf).
Emulator State Snapshots: UEF files.

3.1 Load

Any type of file can be loaded from the 'Load' menu.  The emulator will then mimic the action of either inserting a disc or 
cassette or re-instating a previously stored state (snapshot).

It is worth noting that any changes made to discs, cassette or emulator state - within the emualtor - are not written back to 
the file, unless explicitly 'Saved' at a later point.

The disc drive unit to be loaded (either of two), can be selected from the Disc menu.

When loading Archive files either a disc is created (default) or a cassette can be created (see The Cassette menu).

Another way to load a file is to drag and drop it into the emulator window.  

Note that except for snapshots, loading a file will not automatically run the disc or cassette, this must be done from the
emulator by issuing the appropriate filing system command (e.g. CHAIN).


3.2 Save Disc

The current state of the discs can be saved to file.  These can be saved as either:
Single Sided: the first side of the selected disc is saved as an ssd file.
Double Sided: both sides of the selected disc are saved as a dsd file. 
Archive Format: the first side of the selected disc is saved as a set of inf files.

3.3 Save Cassette

The current state of the cassette is saved as a uef file.

3.4 Save Snapshot

The current state of the emulator is save as a uef file.  This allows you to re-instate a previously session at a later date.
This is useful for saving game positions for example.

3.5 Send Snapshot

Those with an original BBC Micro and a suitable serial cable, can connect with the computer running the emulator and send a 
previously saved Snapshot to run natively on the original BBC Micro. In order to do this correctly take the following steps:

a. Connect the two computers with the serial cable.
b. Turn on the BBC Micro (or reset by pressing Break)
c. Enter *FX2,1 on the BBC Micro and press Return.  This will set it to receive keyboard input from the serial (RS432) port.
d. Select 'Send Snapshot' on the emulator and find the snapshot (uef) file to send.
e. Wait for about 20 seconds for the transfer to take place.
f. Both the emulator and BBC Micro will then be simultaneously loaded with the Snapshot.


4. The Disc Menu
4.1 Insert Blank
This will create a blank double sided disc. Any previously loaded disc will be erased.  Note that this is dependent on which
drive has been selected.

4.2 Eject
The disc in the currently selected drive can no longer be read and will produce an error in emulator if read.

4.3 Flip Sides
This will swap the two sides of the currently selected disc.  This allows different sides of a double sided disc to be saved
as a single sided disc.

4.4 Select Drive
The selects which drive unit is in force when performing any disc related menu operation.


5. The Cassette Menu
5.1 Insert and Eject
These will be availble in a future release of VBeeb.

5.2 Control
This will display a pop-up showing all the blocks on a tape.  Whilst loading a tape (using CHAIN for example), the tape can 
be re-wound or forward-wound by clicking on the appropriate block.

5.3 Load Archive As Cassette
By default files in Archive format are loaded as a disc. By ticking this option the Archive files will be loaded as cassette.
Archive files may be ordered or unordered.  Ordered files will be loaded as cassette in the order given.


6. The System Menu
The system menu lets you change certain aspects of the hardware configuration of the emulator.

6.1 ROM Sockets
The original BBC Micro motherboard had space for four 8k ROM chips. ROM chips are stored as files with the rom extension.
One of the these would be occupied by the BBC Basic ROM and one by the Disc Filing System ROM (Acorn). 
By default on first using the emulator both these ROMs will be present.

A new ROM can be inserted by selecting the Load menu on the corresponding socket.
A socket can be made empty by selecting the Empy menu.
A socket can be made as a writeable RAM chip (sideways RAM), by ticking the Sideways RAM menu.

Usually a Reboot (see below) should be performed after changing the configuration of ROM sockets.

6.2 Keyboard Links
On some BBC Micros a set of dip switches on the keyboard PCB allowed for selecting the display mode on boot (and certain aspects
of the disc drive system).
Ticking a link box is the equivalent of setting a dip switch to on position.

6.3 Reboot
This performs a hard-reboot of the emulator.  This is equivalent to switching off and then on a real BBC Micro.


7. The VBeeb Menu
7.1 Preferences
This will be available in a future release of VBeeb.

7.2 About
Summary information about VBeeb.

7.3 Exit
The emulator will be closed down.  
Any loaded discs or cassettes or emulator state will be lost.  
Any Cassete or Disc options will be remembered.
The configuration of ROM sockets and Keyboard Links will be remembered.

8. Appendix
If you are unfamiliar with how to program or otherwise operate a BBC Micro, the BBC Microcomputer User Guide, 
BBC Microcomputer Advanced User Guide or BBC Micromputer Disc User Guide are indispensible.
